I didn't know what Solana was. So I
heard a Dely Digital podcast about it.
There's no profiler that shows you which
parts of your code are generating more
like raw instructions. So it's a
different kind of profiling. It's not
adding time around a function. Our goal
is to make a different set of trade-offs
from Fire Dancer and Agave. Our goal is
to try to trade off to keep resource
consumption to a minimum. And how can we
still verify at home? It's it's the only
place where you could also make money
doing it because open source is a very
very viable career path in crypto.
>> Hello hello hello hello. Welcome to
another episode of only devs podcast.
Today we have with us Rohan popularly
known as sexon on Twitter and also on
GitHub. Welcome to the podcast Rohan.
>> Thank you. Thanks for having me. is the
co-founder of overclock validator and
also he's a prolific open source
contributor in the SA ecosystem and also
crypto at large. So today is going to be
a fascinating conversation with Rohan
about one of the projects that he is
actively contributing to Bonsol
which is an offchain computing infra on
Salana. So with that, let's head right
into it.
>> Rohan, do you want to introduce yourself
to the audience?
>> Yeah. Yeah, for sure. And I mean, as
Shek said, uh my name is Rohan. I'm
known as 006 on Twitter and on GitHub.
And I've been like I originally started
off as a software engineer and for like
I used to prefer mainly working for
startups and then uh I like from
software engineering I moved into DevOps
and infra that's how I ended up meeting
seven layer and we started running like
the Solana validator around like mid
2022ish
like uh and yeah since then I've been
like involved in the Solana ecosystem. I
started off running the validator but
then the technical aspects of Solana
started like you know there were not too
many people it was mostly Ethereum and
not too many people on Twitter and not
that much knowledge either. So we could
ask like dumb questions in discord and
uh slowly get to know more about Solana.
And I found it actually very interesting
how like there was a engineering first
approach and like the first thing that
fascinated we me was like how is it able
to do 400 millisecond blocks when the
only other chain I know is doing like
you know like 15-second blocks and
everything. So that's how I got more
interested in the technical side. But
yeah, since then I've like I've also
worked at Sovereign Labs which is a app
like an application rollup framework
that's chain agnostic. So that's where I
actually got to know more about zero
knowledge and everything. And now I'm
full-time I'm doing overclock and
overclock is also developing mithril
which is the
uh golang client for Salana but I also
spend my time with like bonsole and zk
stuff in general. So, so that that's
where I am.
>> So, that sounds great. Um, amongst you
mentioned many things. Um, I'm very
curious to know when did you start the
validator? Were you amongst the initial
people?
>> Um, definitely not among the initial
people like uh because like not not like
when Zan and Lane and all those guys
were there, but Zan and a couple of them
did help me and seven layer get started.
So we like I have to check exactly but I
think it's like
mid uh 2020
two uh 2023. Yeah. Um early 2023 I
think. So we weren't there for the very
first outage that happened in 2021. We
were there the year after that. So yeah
2022. So we've been running it since
then. And uh yeah.
>> Got it. What made you transition into
web 3? Uh you mentioned you were from a
traditional software engineering
background. Um
>> um honestly the technical work was just
interesting originally. It's like you
know crypto is like fascinating and
everyone is talking about it because in
2021 so I ended up like getting into
some random NFTs and everything and then
like uh it was the technical side was
actually very fascinating because uh I I
think yeah it was basically just this
like I didn't know what Solana was so I
heard a Deli digital podcast about it
and they were talking about building a
claw bond chain so I was like that
requires like extremely high
performance. So I was wondering how they
were even doing it. So that was when I
started looking into serum and then uh I
I think fundamentally it's all like
there's originally Solana had these like
eight things that make Solana unique
kind of uh so they introduce everything
like proof of history and then seale I
mean accounts DB I think they called it
something else back then but it never
stuck. uh and including the BPF virtual
machine actually that was so I told you
I was part of infra right so DevOps and
infra so you typically use BPF and eBPF
for inserting probes and tracing like uh
you know like per performance issues or
debugging so and pack like basically BPF
is originally a packet filter and ebpf
is like a more generalized virtual
machine right so that's how I knew about
it and I'm like wait they're actually
using that as like they're using the
main kernel sandboxing properties that
you get for like blockchain safety like
you know they don't want they want a
sandbox where code cannot exit the
machine and like corrupt it in any way
and if it crashes the main process
should still be okay. Those are all like
security requirements for a kernel right
because if you like insert custom code
into a kernel and it hangs your entire
system freezes. So it was very
interesting to me that they were using
that and it made sense because uh the
and it was also like a register based
virtual machine whereas the other ones I
was familiar with like um this uh you
know Ethereum is like a stack based VM
right so so was so that was interesting
and I think the other thing that was
interesting to me was turbines
specifically like how are they able to
disseminate data that fast so the double
like okay I'll spread my packets among
ong this neighborhood and have them
reshare. So it was it was like I think
it was the first technical project where
you know Bitcoin was very cool in terms
of like hash cache and everything but I
think Solana was the first one that made
me really want to dig in on the
engineering side and I think the very
interesting thing to me was there was a
lot of uh engineering focused content in
Solana where I didn't need to know too
much about like cryptographic proofs and
everything. So it was like a lot of
performance that they were getting was
purely around let's just get the
hardware out of the way of like software
right and for me being from infra that
was always appealing like I always liked
so I got into infra at like a very
strange period when it was bare metal
and everything was transitioning to more
and more abstraction like okay from bare
metal you go to EC2 from EC2 to elastic
beanto and then you have containers and
then kubernetes and then like finally
serverless. So finally you got to a
point where the infra is so hidden away
and like I lived through a lot of those
inefficiencies now a lot of those
projects are good but I think with
crypto and especially Solana I really
like the fact that like you know this
was like raw performance like this was
okay I have 256GB of RAM I have 32 cores
how can I exploit them as much as
possible and how can I build like a
global distributed computer that that
that was an Catalie's goal from the
beginning, right? Like compute at the
speed of like your only limitation is
the speed of light. So everything
appealed to me like the people in the
ecosystem were engineering focused and
it was always like okay why can't you do
this right and uh yeah I I think the
engineering first mindset really
appealed to me and being from infra like
I liked looking at all of these like
okay they're using UDP because TCP has
like latency issues so how are they
optimizing for that okay they're using
erasure coding to compensate for packet
loss and they want like very good
latency so that you know the the big
issue with TCP or any error correct like
you know retransmission is you have
round trips for transmitting packets
again right so like Solana was using the
same technology that like a lot of
streaming services and everything used
so I felt like this was very much at the
forefront in terms of like not too many
people do this kind of optimization like
mostly HFT people and it's that's
usually not very open source right it's
all usually more behind closed doors
proprietary and
So and you know that turned out to be
correct because finally we do have a HFT
firm which is building fire dancer using
the same knowledge right they also
realized the same thing like this is
just hardcore engineering this is
hardcore like exploit hardware as much
as possible wherever you can to overcome
limitations. So that that for any you
know crack systems engineer in the
audience this should be like music to
your to your ears. Sena is probably the
place where you could permissionlessly
work on some of the hardest
systems problem that exist out there and
and and also it's it's the only place
where you could also make money doing it
because open source is a very very
viable career path in crypto right
do you want to touch upon you know how
you know you gotten nerd sniped with
everything that's happening in terms of
engineering. You read the blog post and
you also decided you wanted to run a
validator, right? And now you're working
full-time in crypto. Um, and you also
contribute to a lot of open source
projects. Could you kind of
talk about
how does one go about making a career in
open source? Yeah, I I think you just
need a starting point honestly like if
there's a problem that you're interested
in solving like people are very like you
know there are a lot of devs but there
is still like you know there's always
more demand for devs right like if you
look at a lot of people who got into
open source it's fundamentally I am
interested in this thing is there
something that solves this or so for me
I can tell you my very first open source
in crypto was okay I was running the
validator I did the setup and I had a
lot of questions for people. So even
something as simple as getting started
by writing an article around it which is
what like a lot of good validators I
know do which is like you know just
explain the steps and the next logical
step was okay why not automate this with
anible or something like somebody could
find it useful right so that anible
repository ended up getting picked up by
a lot of people and then even GTO also
approached to like okay can we use this
for the validator setup so if like if
you'll find even some of the GTO commits
on the autoc clock is what we called it
because you know for overclock that's
the anible scripts and when we started
writing the anible scripts and during
setup we were like okay the snapshot
download is taking a lot of time so we
started searching if there are scripts
that actually analyze latency and
download snapshots from the nearest
machine and that's how it starts and
then you have like obviously like
modding and stuff right like monitoring
tools for validators like watchtower
alerting like a lot of people who build
useful things in crypto it's like uh
like Solana compass for example is like
a very good website and then lane's uh
stake wiz which all of us use for
checking validators and stake and
everything. So I I feel like as long as
you have a starting point, crypto ends
up pushing you into open source
regardless. Like if you say, "Okay, I
want to run a validator or I want to do
like I I think a a lot of people I get
in touch with from the validator side
are also like people who run uh like
people who are interested in me or
arbitrage, right? So that is something
that I find appeals to a lot of
engineers especially people who are
focused on performance because there's a
direct line between how skilled am I and
how much money can I make. So that's
like very satisfying to a lot of people
who feel like they're not like valued in
their existing careers or who feel that
they have more potential and stuff. But
you know if you do anything related to
ME you'll end up touching like GTO which
is another brilliant like example of an
open source project that has like
billions of dollars like sitting on top
of it right so uh yeah I I think just
finding a starting point ends up like
giving you avenues like obviously like
hackathons and everything like Solana
does value people who contribute to open
source right and there's also like a
recent tweet that I found by Dean uh
Danm M little like the ZS network guy
that was very like I liked it quite a
bit which is like you know if you want
to solve any problem or you want to make
something even 1% better go ahead and do
it right nobody's going to stop you and
if you like don't ask like why not but
just go ahead and do it kind of thing so
like I find like a lot of people you
write useful things then there are a lot
of people willing to help you because
when we started uh Mithril the go client
which overclock is building as Like the
fire dancer people were like very
excited and they were like okay did you
start getting bank hash matches you can
use our conformance test suite like
everyone is usually like you know
Anatoli is like the number one champion
of anybody who does an open source
project right so if you do anything cool
and you post it on Twitter or something
he's more than happy to boost it and
like other people are happy to reach out
if it solves their problem so I I feel
like a lot of projects ended up getting
picked up that way just by boosting in
and just the community being you know
happy about it. So yeah, I'm not sure if
that answers your question, but yeah,
typically I think if you find an entry
point, crypto does let you do it. And
even at Sovereign Labs, the first
version of Sovereign SDK was completely
open- source. And we were using Risk
Zero, which was also like an open-
source project. And I noticed that they
didn't really have a profiler and uh you
know that printed out like the like in I
mean we'll get into this a bit more I
guess but in risk zero the way you do it
is you write a rust program and risk
zero is basically a prover zk proof
system built on top of risk 5. So you
write code like Solana compiles to BPF
right? So similarly risk zero is just
risk 5. So it's an target architecture
set. So you write rust code it compiles
to risk 5 then the prover system then
you execute that code. So you feed like
fun inputs into a function and when you
execute it there's an execution trace
which is like okay like the raw assembly
instructions for one single execution.
That trace is basically what is proven.
So one thing to note is that if your
code compiles to more like if your code
produces more instructions in the trace
then that's directly proportional to the
prover time because every line in the
trace needs to gets proven. So one
interesting thing that we noticed that
sovereign and something that we wanted
to open source was there's no profiler
that shows you which parts of your code
are generating more like raw
instructions. So it's a different kind
of profiling. It's not adding time
around a function, but it's more like,
okay, how sensitive am I? Like if I do
this function call, if it's generating
like 1,000 cycles, how bad is it?
Because the, as I said, the bigger your
execution traces, the longer the proof
time takes. So you want to try and
optimize that as much as possible. So
that's actually what succinct SP1 and a
lot of others do. they look at the
intermediate execution trace and they
like uh transpile it into another format
that does some roll-ups and everything
and have a different prover system
sitting on top. So it is basically like
the go the starting point is still risk
five for them as well. So the I I I just
mentioned this as a context of something
useful that came out which was like the
profiler like the risk zero profiler and
like the sussing team also picked it up
and sovereign still maintains it. So I
feel like if you just if you start
getting involved at some point you'll
find that there are a lot of things that
are not done or that can be done better
and I just say like go ahead and do it
right like 90% of the things that I see
people do are like things that they try
to solve for themselves and very
unsurprisingly other people have the
same problems. So like people who write
monitoring tools or people who write
like validator automation or uh like I
know like margin like uh Kevin from
there wrote like the light SVM and a
bunch of things which are like you know
if you try to run try to develop using
the regular Solana test validator
locally it's not very clean right and
that's how even like anchor and
everything started which is like you
know writing raw smart contracts has so
much boilerplate let me write something
that makes it easier. So yeah, so one
thing I personally believe in is that
nobody should discourage anybody from
doing anything open source. Like when
someone says something like, "Oh, why
are you building this?" That's that's a
little annoying to me. I'm like, you
know, you you should never stop anybody
from building anything, right? And
Solana is very welcoming to that. So I
I've never seen anybody discourage
anybody like, "Okay, don't do this.
Someone else is doing this." Like you
never hear that. So I'm, you know, more
than happy to. That's why that that's
Yeah, I guess for me getting in was
easier because the community was
supportive.
>> That's awesome.
Can you tell us more about what Bonso
is, how it works?
>> Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. So as I said
before like risk zero is like the prover
system that uh bonsole is built on top
of and actually I don't know if you saw
the vitalik post where he said that
ethereum should move away from or like
EVM should be reimplemented in risk 5
one of the reasons for that was like the
fact that risk 5 is a generalized
architecture so the way it works with
rust is like it's an ll like lbm based
compilation process right so you have an
llvm front end that takes rust and
converts it to LLBM intermediate and
then from there uh risk 5 is just an
LLVM target. So you get like the code
compiled to a risk 5 elf which can be
executed in a risk 5 virtual machine and
there are a lot of provers written on
top of that including like risk zero
being the most famous one and obviously
SP1 and I think there's a few others as
well like uh Jensen's groth I remember
like from growth 16 he also ended up
like having something like that. Um so
if you try to use the prover you don't
need to know any of the like if you want
if you try to use the proof system you
don't really need to know any of the
math but you do find yourself copy
pasting a lot of like curve parameters
and everything there are raw crypto
libraries like arcbn and everything in
rust and they're like okay this is curve
verify so you either have to use
somebody else's functions which risk 5
does have like risk zero does have a few
helper functions but ultimately you do
end up uh utilizing like a lot. So, risk
zero produces like a stark proof, right?
The problem with stark proofs is they're
a little larger. Not little, they're
like larger, but there's like a another
process above it called a stark to snark
which is like wrapping like the stark
circuit and a snark circuit to compress
the proof further and that is finally
what is verified on Solana. So maybe
this is interesting in case people don't
know it but the core thing that enables
any of this on Solana is the altbn 128
sys call which got added in 1.16. So
with that Solana is basically like
equivalent to Ethereum in terms of
feature set. So you know you can
technically build rollups on top of
Solana as well like ZK rollups. So it's
I mean we don't need it right now but
it's completely doable. So in in this
entire process that I described risk
zero handles like the start start part
but then you have another tool that you
use for snark to start and the
verification process on Solana is like
you know it's basically like a very
low-level pairing curve call. So when
you're writing the code okay I have this
proof now how do I verify it? you have
to write a lot of code and that's kind
of where Bonsol comes in like their goal
is like you know okay you can do all of
this but in order to verify like the
core function you're verifying is like
100 lines but you're writing about like
500 lines of plumbing around it so
Bonsol is entirely like let me take all
of this and make it easier on Solana so
as a business like as a developer who
wants to use the prover system you don't
need to care about curve parameters. you
don't need to care about um what sis
calls need to be called to verify the
proof like all of that like bonsole is
basically I I'd say something like uh on
the verifier side and on the prover side
there are a lot of things to do bonso's
job is you know submit a proof request
and everything gets handled including
the incentives for who picks up because
proving is a expensive process so like
you need GPUs which make it faster and
now probably in the future A6 as well.
So there needs to be an incentive layer
because nobody wants to give that
massive compute for free, right? So it's
like you submit a proof request, you
upload your ELF or your code that needs
to be proven along with the inputs and
like there's an entire and bonsole also
has like abstractions to submit like
private proofs like risk zero itself has
it as well. But that's kind of what
Bonsol gives you. It's like this
complete infrastructure
and incentive layer as well as onchain
programs that try to hide as much of the
stuff you need to do as possible. So
your goal becomes let me write this code
and let me use the bonsole CLI to do a
few automated things and then onchain
you fire off like one call basically
which is saying like okay it actually
cues up a request because Bonsol's own
incentive layer and its own like queuing
system and everything is also maintained
in contracts Solana contracts which is
hidden from you and then you have Bonsol
worker nodes which pick up these
requests download the elves and then
like provers end up like actually
generating the proof and submitting it
to an onchain contract which also
verifies the proof and does a cross
program invocation to your program. So
it feels like just making a call and
getting a call back and all the
verification curve parameters because
there's also like when uh this is
exactly how I got into bonsole because I
was writing all of this and I'm like I'm
writing an example program which is like
multiplication. So why like I'm having
to do so much of this and I think that's
how I even met like like Obot because I
was using some of his stuff for the st
the stock to snark conversion and he's
like if you use Bonso we're trying to
hide all of this. So that's that's
basically where Bonso comes in. And they
also want to be like prover agnostic.
Right now it supports risk zero. But in
case you want to use like SP1 or any new
prover that comes up, they just want to
kind of make it easier for Solana
developers. Like I think the vision for
Bonsol is to make ZK proving as easy as
possible on Solana. So Risk Zero
accomplishes some of that, but even
after that you'll end up having to do a
lot of plumbing work. So yeah that
that's basically what Bonsol is. It's
like a complete infrastructure layer for
proving and verification on Solana and
trying to make it as easy as possible.
>> You mentioned elves right? So are these
Solana program elves or
these are like offchain pro offchain
programs or offchain code that exists
and that gets compiled down to an else?
>> Yeah this this is offchain. So this elf
format is very different from BPF right.
So BPF is so the way Solana compiles is
very similar to the way risk zero
compiles. Both of them take rust code
and they compile it to LLVM intermediate
but after that they diverge. Solana
targets like the BPF or specifically now
the SVM because it's like the like BPF
is like an open like there's a set of
instructions like 36 assembly op codes
to which you can compile but Solana
added its own sys calls right. So there
is like more things that it's doing and
if you try to run a SANA elf on a
regular BPF VM it'll fail. It'll be like
I do not know what this assembly
instruction you provided is and I don't
know how to handle it. It's similar and
here it diverges to risk 5 and risk 0 is
also like a risk 5. So basically when
you write code in risk zero it gets
compiled to an elf. This elf is only
relevant to risk zero like it's not
really like solana doesn't understand
that elf. So you can hash the elf and
that becomes like the image of the
program and you can give it to somebody
and when you generate a proof with that
elf. So let's say I write a program like
this is actually a very good and very
simple example, right? I want to write a
program that uh compresses like 1,000
signatures into like one proof or
something. So I write like a function.
The first parameter will be like the
thousand public keys, the thousand
signatures and the one message that all
of these private keys have actually
signed. So inside my code, what do I do?
I basically loop over like let's assume
there's like you know like zip zip
mapping. So zero corresponds to zero
signature. So I loop over the signatures
sig of zero I verify with like pub key
of zero and message and then that's
true. So I just do that like a bunch of
times thousand times or something and
then I return true. Right? So that's
like my program and if I feed this into
risk zero it says okay this is the code
and here is the 32 byt
commitment or hash that corresponds to
this program I can put it on solana and
now what I do is I feed this program
like this I when I compile it I get an
right so there is like risk zero has a
way to feed inputs into elf and get the
proof out of it that's what risk zero
solves for us so now I'm like okay here
are 1,00 public keys and Here are 1,000
signatures and here is the common
message that all of them signed which
can be a Solana hash or something. So
now risk zero and the stark to snark
ends up generating like a proof like
which is like a certain number of bytes.
I think it's 196 bytes or something. But
this proof all this this is like a
receipt because it has the proof. It has
a commitment to the inputs because you
need to know that these inputs have not
been tampered with by the prover. You
just take this and you submit it to
Solana and Solana is like okay because
the proof is also valid only for that
hash the proof also contains like when
you do verification it's able to verify
that this proof belongs to this image
that it's not like nobody tampered it
and said okay if any one of them matches
then return true that image will be
different it's fundamentally just
hashing right so that proof won't work
so they can't tamper with that so if if
Solana onchain knows who these thousand
people are and their public keys. It can
like the code can also commit to a
Merkel route of these public keys and if
that's present in the receipt then the
Solana program also knows that hey these
public keys have not been tampered with.
These are really the keys that are
saying that sign this message. Okay here
so Solana's input is basically the image
hash the Merkel root of these public
keys and a hash of the text that they're
signing with these. It's just able to in
constant time verify like a call saying
that okay this computation has been done
correctly. Right? So the beautiful part
about this is that verifying thousand
signatures would require like 1,000
transactions on Solana. But if you
actually did this with ZK then you're
able to do all you're able to compress
all of that compute into a single allb
and 128 sys call. So you need to do some
setup earlier which is like store the
hashes of these inputs in a smart
contract or something but as long as the
Solana program has this information it
can verify that computation was done
correctly. So I mentioned ED25519 but
imagine that there's an other signature
scheme that is maybe user friendly they
have like their own identity derivation
or something right and you want to
verify that you can do that as well.
Solana doesn't have like a like okay
let's take uh BLS 12381 or something for
whatever reason people have BLS public
keys and they want to verify those
signatures so Lana can't natively verify
this cryptographic scheme but with zero
knowledge compute you can write a
generalized circuit for anything like I
mentioned something like verifying
10,000 or 1,000 ED25519 signatures but
it can be any cryptographic protocol it
can be whatever you want it can even be
like game logic which says here is the
initial state. These are all the turns
that people have done like like chess
moves, right? For example, like it's a
deterministic like chess is like a
deterministic game where you have a
start state and when each player like
turn by turn does a sequence of moves,
you always end up with the same final
state. So you can prove all of like you
can prove an entire chess game was done
correctly. The rules engine will check
all the validity of the moves and the
winner. And if you just submit a proof,
you can give like a token to whoever won
the game or something. So the
compression part is actually very
underrated because I know Solana is
trying to increase the compute limit and
everything but this basically makes it
almost infinite. So how muchever you
want to prove your verification is still
just like once a call. So that's
actually the real value in using ZK on
Solana. So to I I mean I went on a huge
tangent, but the elf is what you asked
about, right? So it's basically like a
risk 5 elf, a custom risk 5 target elf.
So Solana doesn't care about that elf.
It only cares about the image of that
elf which is relevant in terms of
verifying a risk zero proof.
>> But this is super fascinating, right? So
basically what it enables is on Salana
you have like a very every block there's
only so much amount of compute unit that
you can have but then the real world is
such that there's infinite amount of
compute that you can do. So moving that
off chain you you are able to kind of
elegantly create a proof for any
computation that you have done and
>> bring it on to solant and verify it
right so this definitely opens up so for
example in like you mentioned games or
even any complicated maybe anything uh
say running a fraud deduction algorithm
or some kind of an ML model right so
that also becomes
So that I that also brings up another
question and before that I have one more
question that I wanted to ask. You
mentioned
wrapping a stark in a snark. So what
what exactly does it mean to wrap this
that is
>> oh
it's actually quite simple. I mentioned
that you can write any generalized
program right. So the start to snark
snapper is literally like code that says
here is a like I said uh that our
example had 1,00 public keys 10,00
signatures and a single message and
you're verifying that as part of your
circuit right your rust function that
gets compiled by risk zero. This stark
to snack wrapper is literally like
something similar to that where you have
a start proof which has its own
parameters. So you're basically
generating a snark proof that this start
proof is valid. So this function takes
like this
>> program which does the
>> Yeah, exactly. It's just a one level of
in like it's another layer on top that
says like in in the case one we are
proving that 1,00 signatures,00 public
1,000 keys correctly signed a message.
Here you you have a circuit that
basically says here is like the code to
like I'm getting my stark as an input
and here is a snark that the stark is
valid. So the benefit of that is starks
are login which is like they're larger
the proof size is larger and everything.
Snarks are smaller so and they're
constant time so you know the size is
smaller and everything and Solana
already has the orb BN128 sys call so
you can use that for so yeah
>> interesting I think that that brought up
another interesting point right these
programs could also be proven
recursively for example basically in
what what you said right you have two
functions and you're pro one and then
you're composing with another one. Now
>> as a combination of these two, you have
generated another proof and it doesn't
really matter what the proof system is.
You can
>> Exactly. From one to another. Wow,
that's so elegant.
>> Yeah. Yeah, it is. That's actually how
uh risk zero and bonsol handle private
inputs as well because if you're
generating the proof on your local
machine you can decide to so this is
also what enables privacy by the way
like if you take a general math
computation as like y= f of abc you can
choose which of the abc you reveal and
which ones you don't. So you can say I
only want to reveal C and you generate a
proof and then you're basically saying I
know a b such that f of abc results in a
specific y. A simple example of that is
if I want to prove to you that I know
the factors of any number. So let's say
I want to tell you I know the factors of
36. Right? So this can be written by a
function that takes f of abc and inside
the logic it's literally c double equals
a into b right. So I'm only going to
reveal c to you and I'm going to
generate like I'm going to call this
function locally with f of 94 and 36. So
9/4s is 36 right? So I don't need to
reveal the 94 to you. I'm revealing to
you 36 and I'm revealing to you the
image of this function that I wrote
which is f of like you know uh y like c
equals c double equals boolean like just
a comparison couble equals a star b and
committing to the output there's some
logic so I reveal to you this in image
of this code I can't tamper with this
because that's already been committed to
and I reveal to you 36 and I reveal to
you a proof so now by verifying this you
know that I know some maybe that that
can multiply to C but I don't need to
tell you that I picked 9 and four right
and this is precisely what enables most
of zero like hiding information it's
like knowledge of pre-image so what I
explained with like multiplication can
also be done with hashing which is I
know some text that hashes to this but I
don't need to reveal that text to you so
without ZK the way you verify if I say
that you know my name is Rohan
and I it hashes to like some 32-bit
value and I give you the 32-bit value
without zero knowledge. You'd be like
okay you need to give me like your my
name is Rohan I'll hash it and I'll
verify it but then I'm already revealing
to you the data right here I don't need
to do that I can say I know some data
that you know uh actually commits to
this hash and I can give you the hash
and the proof and I don't need to reveal
that. So privacy is one effect of zk
which is zero like they're commonly
called like you know uh zk snarks and zk
starks right the zk stands for zero
knowledge but the s is the part that
stands for succinct which means you
don't like in order to verify
that I did the computation correctly you
don't need to do the entire computation
on your own again you just need to
verify a proof which is typically
smaller it's either login in the case of
starts or constant time in the case of
snarks. So that that compression that uh
the succinctness property is what
enables like the compression of compute
that we're talking about infinite
scalability and generalized computation
proving proof of correct computation and
hiding the inputs is what enables
privacy. So you can build privacy based
applications as well as you know like
heavily like you know you can do things
and also the other beautiful part about
this is risk zero works with risk 5
which is a standard LLVM back end right
so if somebody wanted to write a program
in any other language they can do that
as well it just they just need an LLVM
front end for that and you can compile
it down to risk 5 and prove it so all
you need like risk zero only cares about
the back end like how solar cares about
BPF and there are multiple ways to
generate like a valid Solana BPF, right?
Some people like writing in raw BPF.
Some people use the anchor SDK and rust.
You can use Rust and C to write Solana
code, right? That's something you see in
the example. So, you can you can do that
with Risk Zero as well. Like if there's
some interesting language you want to
write in, you can go ahead and do that.
It just needs to be compilable. So,
>> fascinating. There's I you brought up
one thing that I'm actually curious
about. For example, typically when you
deal with hash uh the the most common
hash function like SH 256, you're
essentially dealing with static inputs
and then that's what a hash is produced.
Typically functions functions that are
parameterized and have branches or etc
have there is variability and also it's
parameterized right so how do you how
does this hash function work if I were
to namely think of like a hash function
that works on static inputs
>> okay um uh I did I mean here the proof
you're generating is so the static part
is like the static code but when you
generate a proof you're generating it
for a set of inputs against that. So
that's like so the same proof system and
the code you're writing for a hash
function can work for any input right
like it can work for any text. So your
hash function code in risk zero or risk
5 would basically look like uh my hash
of like input and then inside the code
you're you can import rust like sh 256
crypto library and you can call sh 256
on that input to calculate the hash. So
now you have your elf that you compiled.
The elf is actually static. The risk
zero works on the execution trace. In
order to prove it, you need to execute
the elf first. So to answer your
question, the first step of any proof
system is you actually run the execution
with a certain with whatever inputs you
want. If you want to generate the proof
for your name and I want to generate it
for mine, both of us just run the same
like the elf is already there. The ELF's
image is there on Solana. Both of us
have our dynamic inputs. We are
independently feeding it into the prover
system on our own computers. Our proofs
will look different because our inputs
are different. But both these proofs can
be verified on Solana. So it's basically
proof of it to be honest like I think
risk zero or like risk 5 and all of this
this concept is very similar to a
signature scheme like even if you don't
know what happens behind the scenes like
I mean I read ED25519 at some point but
I don't remember any of it. So but I can
still use an AD25519 library right to
generalize like verify signatures on any
private key any so risk zero risk 5 is
the same it's just that instead of the
verify function having signature public
key and message it has like image proof
input send a bunch of other things so
and whatever receipt is. So ultimately
the core abstraction is the same as
verifying a signature. It's just that
there are more steps involved in
everything. So yeah I I hope that
answers your question like regarding the
dynamic part of it. I
>> I was curious about it from the
perspective of for example if I have a
piece of function
>> Mhm. And that function has say branching
right. Um how do you generate a unless
Oh okay so you're saying after you
execute you would know the execution
trace
>> execution trace exactly you don't care
what is in the function that's the
beauty of it you can use other libraries
but they need to be compatible with no
std because the LLVM compiler needs to
know like if you use memory allocation
or something risk 5 doesn't natively
support that so it'll just break when
you're generating the proof but as long
as you have pure rust or any like
limited std function like vectors and
everything that you're using similar to
Solana because in Solana you'd notice
anybody who's tried to write smart
contracts if you import some libraries
it'll just say I don't know like stack
error or something it'll say right so
it's very similar to that you can do as
much branching in your code as possible
uh this is actually what rollups do
honestly like a rollup is basically the
core component of it is a state
transition function right a state
transition function is something that
says this is my beginning state I apply
this block and this is my output state.
Uh they want to be one level above that
because your initial state is massive.
It's like a set of accounts in your
database. So what you can do is you can
say this is my input Merkel route. This
is the block that I want to execute the
10 transactions after I execute it this
is the output Merkel route I get. So
when you commit to that then you're
basically proving the execution of a
block with a start route and an end
route. That's fundamentally how roll-ups
work. They apply it on a chain of
executions and submit as you said
recursively. So you can prove that like
you know you did like uh you know the
state changed from S to S prime when you
applied block one S prime to SP prime
when you applied block two. So you have
a initial state final state and you can
generate a proof of all that
computation. So risk zero risk 5 they
don't care how much branching logic you
have. They don't care what you do
inside. You can even panic and
everything. Ultimately risk yeah because
the beauty of it is risk 5 is so
generalized it just generates an
execution trace and the risk 5 virtual
machine like any of these instruction
set virtual machines if you look at it
they're basically like a set of
registers a set of memory so
>> I have a code that compiles to
>> exactly it should just work
>> it should just work and risk zero the
way it works is what I said how
blockchains work you have some initial
state in terms of register values. Risk
5 has like 32 registers or something and
like a static slab of memory and there's
some initial state and as you execute
instructions these registers keep
getting flipped. Right? So that's
actually what risk zero is proving. It's
proving this is the start state, this is
the end state and when you panic one of
these registers will get set. So that's
how you can prove that the code panicked
as well. So it's it's actually you can
yeah you can write whatever you want
inside and you can prove it.
>> Awesome.
Yeah,
>> switching gears a bit. You mentioned uh
you're also working on uh a go client
for Solana. Um
>> yeah,
>> so would love to know the kind of
challenges that come in building. I
guess this is this probably the fourth
client then on Solana. Uh or are there
more?
>> Seems accurate because you have Agave
the Rust one, you have Fire Dancer, you
have Sig, which is the Zig one,
>> you have Mithril. I think there I don't
know if there are others.
>> Got it. It's like a pretty challenging
task. Um so would love to know why Go to
begin with and then uh what it takes to
build a client on Salana.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. That that's actually a
very good question. So first for in
terms of why Go um
like I think Go has like I personally
like Rust quite a bit. I don't like Go
in the context of like Go semantics, but
Go's tool chain and performance are like
undeniable at this point. like uh I
think in terms of pure like go also
compiles straight to like I don't know
how much you know about this and maybe
some of the viewers might not but
typically most languages have
dependencies on libby and everything
right if you and like if you're building
a new language you try to build it by
using libby to make library calls I
think go because they were like people
who created like the plan 9 operating
system they knew kernels very well and
they're like let's just remove like
library calls and we'll make direct SIS
calls. So when you compile go you get a
fat binary that is like directly uh like
you it doesn't have any dependencies you
can throw that on any Linux kernel and
it can work. So I not just any Linux
kernel but Go's cross compilation is
pretty good. Like if you have code you
can and as long as it's pure Go code you
can generate binaries that work for like
ARM. You can generate binaries that work
for x86 uh like the OS architecture
targets are very good. So the tool chain
being very good is one reason we like
go. The second reason is we did want to
enable client diversity because you
already have C and you already have
Rust, right? Um, one thing that we
particularly cared about is like
Ethereum actually has like a lot of Go
developers and Rust is seen by a lot of
people as having a high entry barrier.
Honest, and this is like for any viewers
who might be thinking about it. Rust
does not like like if you go through all
the Solana code I don't think you'll
find lifetimes particularly like
anywhere like I think purely from type
safety you get like a lot of benefits
from Rust so I'd encourage everybody to
just give it a try and not be
intimidated by the memory safety
features and everything but that being
said Rust does take a little bit of
getting used to we do know there are a
lot of like you mentioned systems
engineers right go is like still very
popular and we wanted to have an easyto-
read implementation that they can
follow. So what Mithril does that's
different from what Agawe and Fire
Dancer do is Agaw and Firedancer are
full-fledged validator clients that do
voting block production and everything.
Our goal with Mithril was very simple.
Let's just do the bare minimum that you
need for the state transition function.
So if you have some initial state, what
are the core rules of the protocol that
determine the validity of this block and
produce the next valid state. So if you
look at Solana code, you'll find like
initially it'll do a lot of network
setup, set up the bank and everything.
Uh we wanted something that was much
simpler. I'm pretty sure even in Agave
you can try to isolate these components
but it's not that easy to use it. And as
I said like targeting go the go
ecosystem was something that we were
interested in. We wanted to provide an
easy entry point for people who are like
and that's actually if you look at the
reasons why they developed Go as well.
That's one of the reasons they wanted
like a simple language that anybody
fresh out of college like you can learn
Go in like a day or two like if you just
because the I'm I'm not dismissing Go
that way. I think talented programmers
do need to like you know you have
extremely talented programmers in go
like Richard who's an works at fire
dancer is like the best example of like
he's actually what started like Mithril
technically he originally created
radiance which was basically the BPF
virtual machine he started implementing
like the Solana virtual machine and
Golang like any VM implementation is
basically uh you have a set of like it's
what I said you have registers you
create an array to hold the state of
those registers. You create some memory
and create like some kind of an
addressing and the the the language or
the instruction set has like a
specification saying load will end up
moving from register zero to memory or
like things like that. So if you
implement all of that you have a virtual
machine. So that's basically and in
addition to that you need the sys calls
as well. So client diversity was one
thing. Uh the other thing was we wanted
a pure Go client that could potentially
be compiled to other architectures. Uh
we didn't want to be tied to any Linux
features or anything. So we're trying to
be I mean obviously you know the goal is
to get something working first and then
you iterate right. So there are still
some components there that might not be
pure Go. They jump into CGO which has a
lip dependency. But to a large extent I
think we want to try to be archite
architecture
away from architecture a little bit so
that uh so that easy to read get
ethereum or people who are more familiar
with like rust and go are the two
biggest languages used in blockchain
right so and solana is for everyone so
we definitely wanted the gobs also to be
like at home uh but other than that
mithril's personal goal is to be to
enable this verification to happen at
home or on much smaller hardware. This
was something an atali used to tell
right from the beginning when people
from Ethereum and everything used to say
things like uh oh you can't run you need
like massive hardware to run Solana. The
thing is you need massive hardware to
run a very performant Solana validator.
But if you want to just verify the chain
or if your goal is not to produce blocks
or your goal like instead of being like
100 milliseconds away from the tip, if
you're okay with like being one or two
seconds away from the tip and if you
fall behind like catch up in like large
sections like by playing parallelly I
think all of that like Mithril that's
what we demoed at accelerate as well
that can be done on significantly
smaller hardware. So because it is the
same core logic of Salana applied here
like if you exploit hardware to its
fullest ultimately what you're doing is
you're executing a bunch of transactions
against state on disk and you can do
that in reasonable time. So as an
engineering challenge our goal is to
optimize our goal is to make a different
set of tradeoffs from fire dancer and
agave. Our goal is to try to trade off
to keep resource consumption to a
minimum and how can we still verify at
home because as much as we talk about
risk zero and everything a full node is
the only definition of like trustless
access to a chain because even if you
use zk proof to prove state transitions
and everything like you're still
layering trust assumptions the trust
assumption here is the zk knowledge
system and there is a concrete
mathematical definition like there's one
like discrete log is like for signatures
right similarly for snarks you have like
uh I don't know like bilinear defy
helman or something so you're trusting
that the protocol is implemented
correctly and you're trusting like in
the hardness of the bilinear defy helman
problem or like k like there's a few
other trust assumptions for snarks so a
full node is the only trustless way to
access it it's like the baseline
anything else you do on top of that adds
more assumptions so that's trust
minimized so our goal was that we do
need to have like a reference
implementation and Solana and all they
they continuously keep adding more
features around uh networking and
everything right which are technically
out of protocol so they don't change the
core state transition function so we
wanted like a implementation that is
detached and has the core protocol
isolated and all the networking stuff is
pushed to the side so that can get
upgraded and we can use like like call
into Solana like the Agave client for
that. But the core state transition
function, we wanted to keep it clean,
have it in go, have anybody understand
it. And yeah, that's basically the goals
of Mithril as well as like why we pick
Go.
>> Got it. That makes sense. Um,
>> yeah.
>> Thank you so much, Rohan. This was super
insightful. Shake, do you have any other
questions?
>> No, I'm I'm good. Thank you so much for
joining us on this part and it's been
like super both informational and also
extremely educative. So,
>> thank you. Thank you so much.
>> Hopefully I'm pretty sure the audience
are going to love this podcast.
>> Love.
>> Yeah. I mean, I'm always available for
Yeah. Yeah. Anytime I'm available for
questions, you can join like the pawn
soul telegram if you want to learn more
about ZK stuff. I'm happy to I'm always
answering questions there. So, if
anybody has any questions or want to get
started with ZK and they join like the
Bonsole Telegram chat, they can even tag
me. I'm more than happy to guide them on
it. So, yeah. Awesome. Thank you so
much.
>> Yeah. Thank you. Thank you guys.
>> Thank you everyone. See you. Bye.